---
title: The halo model of galaxy formation and evolution
date: 2023-05-29
description:
    Here we draw a simplified physical picture about the formation of dark
    matter halos and galaxies, and how they are connected to each other.
tags: ["Galaxy-halo connection"]
categories: [Astrophysics]
---

# Inhomogeneity in our Universe

Large galaxy surveys reveal the inhomogeneity of our Universe in a sense that
galaxies are spatially clustered, rather than uniformly distributed. This
inhomogeneity originates from the small density fluctuation in our primordial
Universe, which is then amplified by gravity. On the other side, our Universe
comprises 70% dark energy, 25% dark matter, and 5% baryon. And since dark energy
is believed to be absolutely uniform in our current understanding, the
inhomogeneity in our Universe is from dark matter and baryon.

# The formation of halos and galaxies

The final state that an over-dense region can be amplified is a virialized
structure called dark matter halo, when the pressure from the random motion of
dark matter particles equilibrate the attracting gravity. These dark matter
halos are the basic "elements" that compose the large-scale structure in our
Universe. The final virial equilibrium state can be reached since dark matter
cannot emit these kinetic energy away through electromagnetic radiation, which
can be done for baryons. When the inhomogeneity is not so large, baryons
basically follow the dark matter. However, when the inhomogeneity becomes large
enough, baryons in over-dense regions will collide with each other and excite
the electron to higher energy states, which will then decay to the ground level
and emit a photo. Through this process, baryons can emit their energy away and
keep collapsing. Formally speaking, this difference between dark matter and
baryon is due to that the former is "collisionless" while the latter is
"collisional".

After emitting their energy away through radiation, baryons can collapse into
smaller scales and reach higher kinetic energy, i.e. higher temperature.
Eventually, the nuclei reaction can be triggered and stars are formed. Stars,
unlike gaseous baryons, are collisionless, so they can also reach the final
state of virial equilibrium. And the assemble of these stars is called a galaxy.

# Galaxy-halo connection

Galaxies are formed and evolved in dark matter halos, so strong correlations
between their properties are expected. A representative connection is the
**stellar mass-halo mass relation (SHMR)**, which is a tight positive
correlation between the galaxy stellar mass and the dark matter halo mass.

First, this positive correlation is expected since baryons follow the spatial
distribution of dark matter in primordial universe so that more massive halos
have more abundant baryons to be converted into stars. Second, this relation is
not linear. Instead, it can be described by a double power-law function with the
stellar conversion efficiencies suppressed at both the low-mass and high-mass
ends. The peak efficiency appears at $\sim 10^{12}M_\odot$, i.e. the halo mass
of our Milky Way.

The underlying physics to suppress the stellar conversion efficiency at both
ends is still under debate, but some promising mechanisms are advocated. For
low-mass halos, the stellar and supernovae feedback processes can effectively
suppress the star formation activities by eject baryons out of their shallow
gravitational potential. For massive halos, two major mechanisms are at work.
The first one is that the accreted gas is shock-heated to very high temperature
and they cannot be easily cooled down. The second one is that the energetic
feedback from the accretion of super-massive black holes in the galaxy center
can push baryons out of the galaxy and keep them hot to prevent their infall.

# Central/satellite dichotomy

## Halo merger and galaxy merger

The above narrative draws a simple picture for halo formation and galaxy
formation for an isolated system. However, halos and galaxies are interacting
with each other.

Dark matter halos will merger with each other under gravity. These halo merger
events will also bring galaxies together. Since halos and galaxies differ a lot
in their size, there is a time delay between the halo merger and the galaxy
merger. During this time duration, multiple galaxies and their subhalos share a
common dark matter halo, and they are referred to as galaxy group/cluster (Note:
A massive galaxy group with halo mass above $10^{14}M_\odot$ is called a galaxy
cluster).

Most of the halo mergers are minor mergers, i.e. a small halo is merger with a
much larger halo. In these situations, we expect that the larger halo is nearly
intact, while the smaller halo and the corresponding galaxy is moving toward the
center of the larger halo under gravity. This difference establish the dichotomy
of member galaxies in each galaxy group: a relatively massive **central galaxy**
in the group center with small relative motion to the host halo, and zero to
multiple relatively low-mass **satellite galaxies** moving relatively fast
around the group center.

## Environmental effects on satellite galaxies

The deviation from the group center and the fast relative motion make satellite
galaxies subject to various environmental effects. First, their matter
accretions, dark matter and baryon, are halted. Without these fresh gas
replenishment, the star formation activities of these galaxies cannot be
sustained once the existing gas is consumed. This effect is called
**starvation** or **strangulation**. Second, their large relative velocity with
respect to the host halo cause the hydrodynamical interaction between the cold
interstellar medium (ISM) and the hot intra-cluster medium (ICM). When this
interaction becomes strong enough, the cold ISM will be stripped out of the
satellite galaxy, which will also affect the subsequent evolution of these
galaxies. This effect is called the **ram-pressure stripping**. Third, since
satellite galaxies have finite size, they will also suffer from the tidal force
exerted by the host halo, which can alter the kinematics of satellite galaxies.
Finally, the interaction between the subhalo and the host halo can decelerate
the angular motion of the satellite subhalo and make them fall into the center
of the host halo, which will cause the subhalo and the galaxies in it to merge
with the central galaxy. This interaction is called **dynamical friction**, and
the final galaxy merger is call **cannibalism**.

# Summay in a figure

<figure id="fig1">
<img src="/blog/image/halo_model_fig1.png" width=740>
<figcaption>
<strong> Figure 1.</strong>
A schematic draw about the formation of dark matter halos and galaxies.
</figcaption>
</figure>
